title:	MultiMarkdown Developer's Guide
author:	Fletcher T. Penney
version:	7.0.0
revised:	2026-03-13
baseheaderlevel:	1
css:	css/Classless.min.css
htmlheader: <style>main {display: grid; grid-template-columns: 16em 45em; margin: 0 auto; gap: 20px;}
    main > nav {position: sticky; align-self: start; top: 2rem; animation-timeline: view();}
    del { background: #fae6e6; } ins { background: #ecfce6; } span.critic.comment { color: #0000bb; }
    span.critic.comment::before { content: "{>> "; } span.critic.comment::after { content: " \3C\3C}"; } 
    </style>
mmdheader: {{header.md}}
mmdfooter: {{footer.md}}

## Introduction ##
### Why MultiMarkdown v7? ###

The "initial public commit" for MultiMarkdown v6 was January 18, 2017.  I had
first started working on it in early 2016, however.  v6 was almost a complete
rewrite of v5, which still used a [PEG].  Because of that, there was a great
deal of "learning while building", and the code was sloppier than it should
have been in some places.

The API was also not as clean as it could have been, which required including
several different header files in order to parse text into HTML within
another project.


### Differences from MultiMarkdown v6 ###

* The code has been almost completely rewritten yet again.  It is generally
  much cleaner and better organized.

* The API is cleaner.  A single header file (`libMultiMarkdown7.h`) needs to be
  included and should have everything you need to use MMD in most other
  projects.  I have used libMultiMarkdown inside a Swift project without any
  difficulty.

* Performance is better.  Depending on the test content, it is *significantly*
  faster than v6.  It is almost always faster than [CommonMark] (v 0.31.1),
  and at times gets somewhat close to [MD4C]. There are a few things to
  remember:

	* MultiMarkdown has more features than CommonMark and MD4C. Some of these
	  will necessarily cause a performance hit when compared to not using
	  those features (such as the more complex output for `# Headers #`).
	  Compatibility mode turns off most of those features, but in a few cases
	  there will still be a slight performance cost even in compatibility mode.

	* MultiMarkdown has to be capable of returning an AST in order to be used
	  in some situations (e.g. as a syntax highlighter for MultiMarkdown
	  Composer.)  This means it will necessarily be slower than MD4C in all
	  but the most trivial of test cases.  That said, I include MD4C in the
	  benchmark testing as something of a "lower bound" to shoot for.

	* The benchmark testing (in /dev) performs comparisons between MMD 6, MMD
	  7, CommonMark, and MD4C (if you have those installed). Additionally, it
	  compares HTML, compatibility mode, and LaTeX output in MMD 7.
	  (NOTE: MD4C installed via homebrew chokes on the `many-links` test
	  file. I don't know why.  Building MD4C yourself from source repo works
	  fine.)

* The syntax is generally the same, but there are edge cases that are handled
  slightly differently.  To my knowledge, these represent intentional changes
  that I believe are more "correct."  At this time, I do not have an
  exhaustive list.  The best way to see the differences is to compare the
  output from v6 and v7 on the same source file.  The test suite has been
  updated to reflect these changes.


## Testing ##
### Updated Test Suite ###

The standard test suite files from prior versions of MMD have been updated to
account for changes from the v7 parser, but also to include new test
situations that have come up.  Most of the changes are relatively minor.

	make
	cd build
	make
	ctest
	ctest -V	# To see details

Additionally, the "test harness" I use to perform integration testing has been
updated to a bash script rather than using a very old Perl script. This
allows the test suite to run on Windows without a Perl installation.


### Unit Testing ###

In most of my projects, I try to make heavy use of unit testing and a
Test-driven development approach.

MultiMarkdown is a bit different because unit testing would be very labor
intensive, and it's really the integration testing at the end that I care the
most about. (I'm not saying that unit testing would be wrong, just that in
this case I'm not sure it's the approach I want to take.)

That said there are a few components that have some unit tests that can be
run.

	make test
	cd build-test
	make
	./run_tests


### Programmatically Generated Test Files ###

In addition to hand-generated test files in the test suite that have been
built up over time, there are some computer generated tests as well.  These
allow more exhaustively testing situations that might not come up in regular
use.

* `Emphasis Test` -- generated by `_generate_test_emphasis.c` to exhaustively
  test combinations of opening and closing strong/emphasis markers using both
  `*` and`_`

* `structure.sh` -- shell script to generate exhaustive combinations of line
  types to verify parser behavior in determining the overall block structure.
  The script can be modified to determine how deep the testing goes.  3 line
  combinations cover the majority of common situations, but some additional
  edge cases arise the further you go.  By the time you get to 5 levels, the
  generated HTML output is over 11 MB long.  As of 2026-03-14, I have tested
  up to 6 levels deep (135.6 MB).

		./tests/structure.sh | ./build/multimarkdown -c | tidy > mmd.html
		./tests/structure.sh | cmark | tidy > cmark.html
		diff mmd.html cmark.html

	(`tidy` cleans up the whitespace to reduce "false positives" when looking
	for differences between MMD and CommonMark.  And to be clear, I am not
	implying that CommonMark gets everything correct in this sort of a
	test. But John MacFarlane has, as usual, done a great job of being
	consistent and precise. One change that I made based on this test was
	to revisit my interpretation of how lazy blockquotes interact with
	other block level elements in Markdown.  I had previously assumed
	(decided??) that lazy blockquote formatting (leaving out the
	initial '>') applied to any blockquote content.  Based on CommonMark's
	interpretation, I reread the Markdown syntax "spec" and agreed that
	it only applied to regular text paragraphs.)


### libFuzzer ###

[libFuzzer] is used for fuzz testing.  Through the course of development, I
was able to find a fair number of bugs this way that would have been
challenging to find otherwise.  This doesn't work on macOS, so I use vagrant
and do the fuzz testing in Ubuntu.  Feel free to participate by running the
fuzz tester yourself, and send me any examples that trigger an error!

    cd fuzz
    make
    cd build
    make
    ./fuzz_mmd-7


### Performance Benchmarking ###

`bench.c` builds a small test program that generates a collection of test
files that stress test a MMD parser with a few different scenarios.
(from <https://gist.github.com/mity/24822b24d35ef1f998f970965f8c8e53>)

It then parses those files several times with MMD v6 and v7, CommonMark, and
MD4C.  `bench.c` will in all likelihood need to be modified to match how
these programs are installed on your machine.

    make
    cd build
    make
    cd ../dev
    make run


## API Changes ##
### API Calls ###

`libMultiMarkdown7.h` defines the API for interacting with the MultiMarkdown 7
library.  I have tried to clean this file up in order to make it clearer to
read and to included everything required to incorporate MMD in most
projects.

You'll notice that most of the primary API calls have 4 variants:

1. One requires a FILE pointer to a file that has been opened. This can also
be `stdin`.

2. One requires path to a file, and MMD handles opening the file for reading.

3. One requires a null terminated C string (which means the string has to be
scanned to determine how long it is.)

4. One requires a C string (optionally null terminated) along with the length
of that string (in bytes). This version does not require an additional pass
to determine the length of the string since it is provided up front. This
variant is preferable to variant 3 if you already know the length of the
string for that reason.

Regardless of how the source text is delivered, MMD expects UTF-8 encoding
(with or without a BOM, which is not needed with UTF-8 encoding).

There are several different call classes available:

* `mmd_process_X` -- source MMD text is fuly processed into another format
  (e.g. HTML) and sent to the desired FILE pointer (e.g. `stdout`)

* `mmd_process_X_to_str` -- same as above, but instead the result is returned
  as a `char *` which represents the output string (or binary data for some
  formats).  The length of the output is placed in `* out_len`.  The returned
  `char *` will need to be freed.

* `mmd_parse_X` -- these functions return the AST in the form of a `mmd_node`
  tree. This can be used as you need, and then cleaned up with
  `mmd_node_tree_free()`.  You will need to pass a pointer to a `read_ctx`.
  Between the returned AST and the updated `read_ctx` you have everything you
  need to do whatever you like with the parsed information, though must also
  have access to the original source text if you want to extract the text
  that a node points to, for example.

* `mmd_ast_X` -- this is a shortcut function that parses source text and sends
  a description of the AST to `stdout` (or another FILE pointer) without
  requiring you to know about `mmd_node`.  Alternatively, you can use
  `mmd_process_X` with an output format of `ast`.

* `mmd_hash_X` -- similar to `mmd_ast_X` but includes hash values for the
  nodes.  Alternatively, you can use `mmd_process_X` with an output format of
  `hash`.  I'm still working on some ways to use these, but the idea is that
  the hash values for each node in the tree allow you to quickly determine
  whether two AST's (or subtrees of the same) are the equivalent
  (identical hash values) or not.

* `mmd_metadata` -- process MMD source text and return the `* read_ctx`
  (which must be freed after use with `read_ctx_free()`.)  This allows you to
  access metadata from a MMD document, along with other extracted
  information.  Currently, you would need `read_ctx.h` in order to do much
  with this, but I plan to update this aspect of the API in the future.

* `custom_seed_rand()` -- several MMD features use pseudo-random numbers to
  prevent collisions between footnote and header anchor ids.  This function
  must be called in order to do the initial seeding for the random number
  generator so that different numbers are generated each time.


### API Enumerations ###

`libMultiMarkdown7.h` also includes the various enums that are used.

* `output_format` -- specifies which output format is desired (one at a time)

* `smart_quote_language` -- specify which localization to use for single and
  double quote pairs, etc.  If I am missing something, please let me know!

* `language` -- some features in MMD (e.g. footnotes) generate English text in
  the final HTML file (such as "see footnote".) Let me know if you have
  another language to contribute.

* `mmd_options` -- bitwise flags for controlling various features of MMD.  See
  `libMultiMarkdown7.h` for details of these options.


All of these values are combined into a single 32-bit unsigned integer.  There
are couple of macros to extract specific values from that combined value if
needed:

* `MMD_OUT_FORMAT_FROM_OPTS()`
* `MMD_SMART_QUOTE_FROM_OPTS()`
* `MMD_LANGUAGE_FROM_OPTS()`


### Abstract Syntax Tree ###

The AST consists of `mmd_node` structs, which specify a type of node, the
starting offset in the source text (in bytes), the length (in bytes), and
pointers to the next node and the first child node.  The tail node points to
the last childe node and is primarily used when building the AST so that a
new child can be appended without walking the linked list.

`mmd_line_node` is the same but adds two more fields specifying where the
actual "content" of the line starts and ends, which allows you to more easily
ignore the markup, such as the leading and trailing `##` in a header.

`node_type` is a value from 1 - 255 that specifies what a specific `mmd_node`
represents.  Values from 1-63 represent LINES in the source text. Values from
64-127 represent block level structures.  Values from 128-255 represent span
level tokens.

***NOTE***: If you customize MMD and add additional node types to the
   enumeration list, be sure assign to the proper value range and follow any
   directions in the comments of `libMultiMarkdown7.h`.

There are several utility macros to help easily determine what grouping a
specific `mmd_node` belongs to based on its type:

* `MMD_NODE_IS_LINE()`
* `MMD_NODE_IS_BLOCK()`
* `MMD_NODE_IS_TOKEN()`


## Command-Line Changes ##

MMD v7 handles arguments from the command-line in a slightly different way
from v6, though the most common use cases are unchanged.

  multimarkdown [--help] {ast|batch|hash|meta|parse} [options] [Input file names]

The first argument should be an action.  If no action is specified, MMD
defaults to the `parse` action.

* `ast` -- Display the AST showing how the document was parsed

* `batch` -- Parse each file individually and write to the same filename with
  a new extension

* `hash` -- Display the hash tree for the parsed document

* `meta` -- Extra metadata from the document without parsing the rest

* `parse` -- Parse the document(s) and export to the desired format


You can then specify different options to adjust the default behavior:

* `-t FORMAT` -- Specify the output format (`html`, `mmd`, `latex`, `docx`,
  `epub`, `itmz`, `opml`, `textbundle`, `textpack`, `ast`, `hash`)

* `-o OUT_FILE` -- Specify the filename for writing the output

* `-l LANGUAGE` -- Specify the language for smart quotes and default markup
  (`en`, `es`, `de`, `fr`, `nl`, `sv`, `he`)

* `-c` -- Markdown compatibility mode -- turn off features that are not in the
  original Markdown specification.  Note that due to bugs in the original
  `Markdown.pl` and due to ambiguities in the original "spec", the output
  will not exactly match John Gruber's `Markdown.pl`.

* `-C` -- Generate a complete document

* `-S` -- Generate a snippet

* `-r` -- Enable file transclusion ("recursive")

* `-D` -- Download assets from the internet (images, CSS) for inclusion in
  package formats (requires libcurl when compiling)

* `-E` -- Embedd assets in non-package formats where possible (e.g. embed
  images directly in HTML as Base64)

* `-p PATH` -- Specify a working directory when parsing from stdin (e.g. for
  transclusion or embedding assets)

* `-A` -- Accept all CriticMarkup changes

* `-R` -- Reject all CriticMarkup changes

* `-O` -- Convert OPML source to MMD text before parsing

* `-I` -- Convert iThoughts source to MMD text before parsing

* `-e` -- Specify metadata key to extract value from MMD source

* `-b` -- Limit parsing to block level only (useful for diagnostics only)

* `-s` -- Log some processing time statistics (does not work on Windows)


## Cross-Platform Compatibility ##
### macOS ###

Primary development for MMD is done on macOS, so everything works.


### *nix ###

Additional compilation and testing is frequently done on Ubuntu Linux via a
Virtualbox VM, so everything should work properly on *nix machines.


### Windows ###

I was finally able to get a minimal development environment working on a
Windows VM using UTM and Windows 11.  It is not tested as regularly as macOS
or *nix environments, but it works and passes the test suite.

However, performance is not what I would have expected.  It's possible this is
because running Windows inside macOS imparts too much of a performance hit?
(Yet running on an Ubuntu VM is just fine...) I worry it's something more
integral to the code and that Windows needs more time profiling to help
improve things.  As I do not have Windows hardware, and have no intention on
purchasing Windows hardware, any contributions here are appreciated!


### Others ###

MultiMarkdown is written in C, and is intended to be able to compiled on any
(reasonable) operating system.

The only external library it uses is `libcurl`, but only if it is found.

CMake is normally used as the build system, but MMD could be compiled by
manually specifying the source files to be compiled of course.  So this is
not a hard requirement either.

If you need to compile MMD on a different system and find that I have done
something that prevents you from doing that, let me know and I will consider
whether anything can be changed.


### Continuous Integration ###

I use Github's actions to run the test suite with every push to the public
repository.  This includes:

* compiling on macOS, Ubuntu, and Windows with `clang` and `gcc`
* running `ctest` on all 3 operating systems

At the very least, this warns me if I push a commit that breaks compilation or
expected output on the test suite on any of the three systems.


## Contributing ##
### Bug Reports and Suggestions ###

I welcome examples of source text that causes MMD to misbehave.  You can
contribute them at the [Github issues page].

Same thing with suggestions for new features.  Be warned, however, that I
rarely add new features to the MMD syntax unless they are truly valuable to a
wide range of users.


### Code Contributions ###

Pull requests can be managed through Github.  However, if your request is more
than a straightforward bug fix, it is unlikely that I will accept it
directly.  It is more likely that I would rewrite the suggested code to
ensure it matches the style and structure of existing code and my
expectations.  So you may be better off discussing the idea with me first
before worrying too much about a pull request.


[>MMD]: MultiMarkdown

[PEG]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parsing_expression_grammar "Parsing Expression Grammar"
[libFuzzer]: https://llvm.org/docs/LibFuzzer.html "libFuzzer"
[CommonMark]: https://commonmark.org "CommonMark"
[MD4C]: https://github.com/mity/md4c "MD4C"
[Github issues page]: https://github.com/fletcher/MultiMarkdown-7/issues "MultiMarkdown Issues"

